Feature/vonk 7873 document migration 5x to 6 (#639)
FirelyTeam/firely-docs-firely-server: maintenance/zero_downtime_migration.rst

.. _zero_downtime_migration:

Zero-downtime Migration
===============================

> 

Reviewer: @eugene-blokhin, please add a note here that a separate license token is needed for migration and in what tire this is available.

Author: that is covered in the prerequisites section

Firely Server v6 introduces an enhanced MongoDB database migration process. In contrast to the previous migration method that required system downtime, this new approach enables zero-downtime migration. This allows for continuous operation of your existing Firely Server instance while the data migration to the new schema proceeds.

.. note::

>    This migration process applies to the *vonkdata* database. 

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we always reference to this db with the name 'vonkdata'. I would describe it as well, like:

the main database, configured as in :ref:`configure_mongodb`

>    If you also use MongoDB as the **admin** database, you will need to initialize a new *vonkadmin* database from scratch by specifying a different connection string for the admin database than your previous installation.

Reviewer 2: I'd include a reference to :ref:`conformance` on how to initialize a fresh admin database.

.. warning::
   Please note that any snapshot produced by the bulk data export functionality will not be available after the migration.

> .. important::

Reviewer 2: This 'important' is partly covered by the warning above. I would merge the two into a single warning box.

   Bulk data export data is excluded from the migration process.

Architecture Overview
---------------------

The following diagram illustrates the architecture and components involved in the migration process:

.. image:: migration-diagram.svg
   :alt: Migration Diagram

The architecture consists of:

* An existing database containing the source data
* The current Firely Server instance maintaining normal operations during migration
* A new target database instance initialized empty
* A migration tool operating asynchronously to transform and transfer data
* A new Firely Server instance configured for the target database
* A reverse proxy managing request routing between instances

.. note::

>    During the migration period, both database instances operate concurrently.

Reviewer 2: Maybe also note that the migration is in :ref:`one direction <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One_Direction>` only. So although even both *Server* instances could work concurrently, changes from the new instance are not synced back to the old instance.

Author: haha, what's this link? :)

Author: I will add a note on this nonetheless

Reviewer 2: @eugene-blokhin : The link was a joke ;-)

Prerequisites
-------------

Before starting the migration, ensure you have:

* Firely Server Integration (FSI) tool downloaded
* Sufficient disk space for both databases during migration
* License file with the token ``http://fire.ly/vonk/plugins/bulk-data-import/migration``
* Access credentials for both source and target MongoDB instances

> * MongoDB Shell (mongosh) installed for sharding configuration

Reviewer 2: Be kind to the reader and include a link if you can.
```suggestion
`MongoDB Shell (mongosh) <https://www.mongodb.com/products/tools/shell>`_ installed for sharding configuration
```

Implementation Process
----------------------

1. Determine the target database deployment location and make a note of the connection string for reference in the next steps.

>    If you use MongoDB as the **admin** database, you will need to initialize a new *vonkadmin* database from scratch by specifying a different connection string for the admin database than your previous installation. If you imported custom conformance resources, make sure to include them in your nw installation. See :ref:`conformance_import` for more information. 

Reviewer 2: Repeating this here in the process steps is confusing. If you want to repeat it, I'd add a line before bullet 1 stating that this is to be applied to the main data database, and refer back to the warning regarding the admin database.

Author: I changed the page slightly so that this section is not needed anymore.

2. For implementations requiring sharding, execute the following configuration steps:

   - Ensure your MongoDB installation supports sharding. Refer to the MongoDB documentation if uncertain.
   - Provision the schema using the following command:

      .. code-block:: bash

>          COLLECTION_NAME=vonkentries

Reviewer 2: Do all scripts work in both bash and Powershell? If not, for which are they written?

Author: I have added separate scripts for bash and powershell.

         CONNECTION_STRING=<YOUR_CONNECTION_STRING>
         LICENSE_FILE=<path-to-your-license-file>

         mkdir empty_dir

>          dotnet fsi.dll \

Reviewer 2: How do you get this fsi.dll? In which directory is this to be executed?
Or could you also use the fsi dotnet-tool? Which - if globally installed - is available everywhere?

Author: I will use `fsi`

        SOURCE_CONNECTION_STRING="<old db connection string>"
        SOURCE_COLLECTION_NAME=vonkentries

        CONNECTION_STRING="<new DB connection string>"
        COLLECTION_NAME=vonkentries

        dotnet fsi.dll \
            --fhir-version $FHIR_VERSION \
            --provisionTargetDatabase true \
            --useRecoveryJournal $RECOVERY_JOURNAL_DIRECTORY \
            --sourceType MongoDb \
            --srcMongoCollection $SOURCE_COLLECTION_NAME \
            --srcMongoConnectionString $SOURCE_CONNECTION_STRING \
            --srcMongoRunningMode $RUNNING_MODE \
            --update-existing-resources ErrorOnConflict \
            --dbType MongoDb \
            --mongoConnectionstring $CONNECTION_STRING \
            --mongoCollection $COLLECTION_NAME \
            --license $LICENSE_FILE

   Migration completion is indicated by the following message: ``No new items found in the database. Waiting for 00:00:05 before retrying...``

4. Provision the new version of Firely Server instance
5. Update the reverse proxy configuration to direct traffic to the new Firely Server instance

> 6. Upon successful migration verification, terminate the FSI migration tool and decommission the previous Firely Server installation.

Reviewer 2: I would make this a bit more elaborate:
4. Provision an instance of the new version of Firely Server
5. Verify that the migration was successful by inspecting the data in the target database, see the Verification Steps below.
6. Redirect traffic...
7. Decommission the instance(s) of the old version of Firely Server
8. Terminate the FSI migration tool

Note that I also reversed the order of steps 7 and 8 to make sure nothing new comes in through the old FS after FSI was terminated. Although the routing by the proxy should also avoid that of course.

Reviewer 2: Numbering was off, but I fixed that for you.

Verification Steps
------------------

After migration completion:

1. Compare record counts between source and target databases:

   .. code-block:: bash

      SOURCE_CONNECTION_STRING="<old db connection string>"
      CONNECTION_STRING="<new DB connection string>"

      # For source database
      mongosh $SOURCE_CONNECTION_STRING --eval "db.vonkentries.count()"
      
      # For target database
      mongosh $CONNECTION_STRING --eval "db.vonkentries.count()"

2. Verify data integrity by sampling records

> 3. Test CRUD operations on the new Firely Server instance

Reviewer 2: I would focus on Search for verification, and not alter any data with C,U and D.

Rollback Plan
-------------

In case of migration issues:

1. Keep the original database and Firely Server instance running
2. Stop the FSI migration process
3. Review logs and correct any issues before retrying
4. If you choose to remove data from the target database and start from scratch, make sure to also remove the journal directory

Performance Optimization
------------------------

**Network Considerations**

> - Use same datacenter for source and target DBs and FSI to ensure high network throughput

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use the same datacenter for the source and target databases and the machine that runs FSI to ensure high network throughput
```
